[docs] Add content for exporting OpenTelemetry metrics (#4498)
elastic/apm-server: docs/guide/opentelemetry-elastic.asciidoc

Elastic's integration is designed to drop into your current OpenTelemetry setup.
We've done this by extending the "contrib" OpenTelemetry collector and adding an Elastic exporter.

Before sending the data to the {stack}, the exporter translates the OpenTelemetry trace data collected from your services

> and the metrics data collected from your infrastructure and applications to Elastic's protocol.

Reviewer: @axw my challenge is that I also want to provide guidance to people who start adopting OpenTelemetry to collect infrastructure metrics. LEt's see how we can simultaneously recommend to use metricbeat for infrastructure metrics and make successful people deciding to use OpenTelemetry to collect infrastructure metrics.

> and the metrics data collected from your infrastructure and applications to Elastic's protocol.

Reviewer: I have a proposal:
* We keep the reference to infrastructure metrics switching infrastructure and application: "...and the metrics data collected from your applications and infrastructure..."
* And we add a `TIP`: "To collect infrastructure metrics, it is recommended to still use the collector Elastic Metricbeat to get a more mature collector with more integrations and with more integrated visualizations"

> and the metrics data collected from your infrastructure and applications to Elastic's protocol.

Author: Your proposal sounds to me.

By extending the OpenTelemetry collector,
no changes are needed in your instrumented services to begin using the {stack}.

> [role="screenshot"]

Reviewer 2: Let's remove the screenshot css from this.

```suggestion
```

Author: Will do. Thanks.

> image::images/open-telemetry-elastic-arch.png[OpenTelemetry Elastic architecture diagram]

Reviewer 2: Should we update the diagram to include metrics?

Reviewer 3: I don't think so. The diagram doesn't mention data types, and there's no change to the deployment architecture.

[[open-telemetry-elastic-works]]
==== How the OpenTelemetry Collector works

The OpenTelemetry collector uses the following three types of components to handle data:

* `receivers`: Configure how data gets to the collector. At least one receiver must be configured.
* `processors`: Defines optional transformations that occur between receiving and exporting data.
* `exporters`: Configures how data is sent to its destination--in this case, the {stack}.

Once a `receiver`, `processor`, and `exporter` is defined, `pipelines` can be configured in the `services` section of your configuration.
The `traces` and `metrics` pipelines define the path of trace data and metrics through your collector and bring all three of these components together.

> TIP: More information is available in the {ot-pipelines}[OpenTelemetry pipeline docs].

Reviewer 2: OTel got rid of their pipeline docs and this link is now a 404. We should update it on line six. Maybe this? https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/master/processor/README.md

Reviewer 3: or https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/configuration/ ?

Author: Thanks. I added https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/configuration/

They can be deployed as often as necessary and scaled up or out.

> Deployment planning resources are available in OpenTelemetry's {ot-collector}[Getting Started]

Reviewer 2: This link is also a 404 and should be updated

Author: Thanks. Added https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/getting-started/

make otelcontribcol

> ----

Reviewer: @axw @EamonnTP I propose to remove the explanation on how to build yourself the collector. The collector is stable enough and official releases cover the feature we need.
Building your own Otel Collector is now an advanced use case, it's not the purpose of this documentation page.

Author: Thanks, will do.

To export traces and metrics to the OpenTelemetry Collector, ensure that you have instrumented your services and applications
with the OpenTelemetry API and/or SDK.

Here is an example of how to set up the OpenTelemetry Java agent.

[source,bash]
----
export OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES=service.name=frontend,service.version=1.0-SNAPSHOT,deployment.environment=staging
java -javaagent:/path/to/opentelemetry-javaagent-all-0.10.1.jar \
     -Dotel.otlp.endpoint=my-otel-collector.mycompany.com:55680 \
     -jar target/frontend-1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar
----

Here is an example of how to capture business metrics from an application.

[source,java]
----
// initialize metric
Meter meter = OpenTelemetry.getGlobalMeter("my-frontend");
DoubleCounter orderValueCounter = meter.doubleCounterBuilder("order_value").build();

public void createOrder(HttpServletRequest request) {

   // create order in the database
   ...
   // increment business metrics for monitoring
   orderValueCounter.add(orderPrice);
}
----

For more information on setting up OpenTelemetry, see the OpenTelemetry's {ot-collector}[Getting Started]

> documentation.

Reviewer 2: I would change this to either this:
```diff
- For more information on setting up OpenTelemetry, see the OpenTelemetry's {ot-collector}[Getting Started]
+ For more information on setting up OpenTelemetry, see the OpenTelemetry {ot-collector}[Getting Started]
```

Or this:
```diff
- For more information on setting up OpenTelemetry, see the OpenTelemetry's {ot-collector}[Getting Started]
+ For more information on setting up OpenTelemetry, see OpenTelemetry's {ot-collector}[Getting Started]
```
For more information on setting up OpenTelemetry, see the OpenTelemetry's {ot-collector}[Getting Started]
documentation.

. Narrow your search with a known OpenTelemetry field. For example, if you have an `order_value` field, add `order_value: *` to your search to return
only OpenTelemetry metrics documents.

[[open-telemetry-elastic-kibana]]
==== Visualize in {kib}

TSVB within {kib} is the recommended visualization for OpenTelemetry metrics. TSVB is a time series data visualizer that allows you to use the full power of the
{es} aggregation framework. With TSVB, you can combine an infinite number of aggregations to display complex data.

In this example eCommerce OpenTelemetry dashboard, there are four visualizations; sales, order count, product cache, and system load. The dashboard provides us with business
KPI metrics, along with performance-related metrics.

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/ecommerce-dashboard.png[OpenTelemetry visualizations]

Let's have a look at how this dashboard was created, specifically the Sales USD and System load visualizations.

. In the side navigation, under *{kib}*, select *Dashboard*.
. Click *Dashboard* and select *Create dashboard*.
. Click *Save*, enter the name of your dashboard, and then click *Save* again.
. Let’s add a Sales USD visualization. Click *Edit*.

> . Click *Create new* and then select *TSVB*.

Reviewer 2: My flow was a little different. What version were you using?

. In the side navigation, under *{kib}*, select *Dashboard*.
. Select *Create new dashboard*.
. Click *Save*, enter the title of your dashboard, and then click *Save* again.
. Let’s add a Sales USD visualization. Click *Edit*.
. Click *Create new* and then select *TSVB*.

Author: The difference is that I found the longest possible route to creating dashboards :-) Followed your steps and they worked perfectly. I'll update the steps.

. For the label name, enter Sales USD, and then select the following:
+
* Aggregation: `Positive Rate`.
* Field: `order_sum`.
* Scale: `auto`.
* Group by: `Everything`

> . Click *Save and return*.

Reviewer 2: My button was only titled "Save". I also had to title the viz at this point. Only after that could I click Save and return

. Now let's create a visualization of load averages on the system. Click *Create new*.
. Select *TSVB*.
. Enter the label name, System load per host IP, and then select the following:
+
* Aggregation: `Average`.
* Field: `system.cpu.load_average.1m`.
* Group by: `Terms`.
* By: `host.ip`.
* Top: `10`.
* Order by: `Doc Count (default)`.
* Direction: `Descending`.

> . Click *Save and return*.

Reviewer 2: Same as above

make otelcontribcol
----

[[open-telemetry-elastic-traces-metrics]]
==== Collect traces and metrics

To export traces and metrics to the OpenTelemetry Collector, ensure that you have instrumented your services and applications
with the OpenTelemetry API and/or SDK. If you haven't, see the Elastic APM <<install-and-run,install and run guide>> to get started

> with Elastic APM Agents instead.

Reviewer 2: I like the examples below, but I think we should be even more clear here that the main purpose of this guide is OTel integration with Elastic, not OTel agent setup. What if we added a NOTE to the top of this section, and a link to OTel api/sdk setup at the bottom?

---

NOTE: This guide assumes your services and applications have already been instrumented with the OpenTelemetry API and/or SDK. If you're new to APM, we recommend <<install-and-run,getting started with Elastic APM agents>> instead.

To export traces and metrics to the OpenTelemetry Collector, ensure that you have instrumented your services and applications with the OpenTelemetry API and/or SDK.

Here is an example of how to set up the OpenTelemetry Java agent.

// example

Here is an example of how to capture business metrics from an application.

// example

For more information on setting up OTel, see <link>.

---

Author: Great suggestion. Thanks!

   // create order in the database
   ...
   // increment business metrics for monitoring
   orderValueCounter.add(orderPrice);
}
----

[float]
[[open-telemetry-elastic-configure]]
==== Configure the collector

Create a `yaml` configuration file.

This example configuration file accepts input from an OpenTelemetry Agent, processes the data, and sends it to an {ess} instance.

[source,yml]
----
  receivers:
    otlp:
      protocols:
        grpc:
          endpoint: 'localhost:55680'
    hostmetrics: <1>
      collection_interval: 1m
      scrapers:
        load:
        memory:

  processors:
    batch: null
    queued_retry: null

  exporters:
    elastic:
      apm_server_url: 'https://elasticapm.example.com' <2>
      secret_token: 'APM_SERVER_SECRET_TOKEN'

  service:
    pipelines:
      metrics:
        receivers:
          - otlp
          - hostmetrics
        exporters:
          - elastic <3>
      traces:
        receivers:
          - otlp
        processors:
          - batch
        exporters:
          - elastic <4>
----
<1> The `hostmetrics` receiver must be defined to generate metrics about the host system scraped from various sources.

> <2> At a minimum, you must define the URL of the APM Server instance you are sending data to. See the <<open-telemetry-elastic-config-ref,configuration reference>>

Reviewer 2: Matching the other callouts

```suggestion
<2> At a minimum, you must define the URL of the APM Server instance you are sending data to. See the <<open-telemetry-elastic-config-ref,configuration reference>>.
```

Author: The end of the sentence is on the next line.

Reviewer 2: lol. Oops!

for additional configuration options, like specifying an API key, secret token, or TLS settings.
<3> To translate metrics, the Elastic exporter must be defined in `service.pipelines.metrics.exporters`. 
<4> To translate trace data, the Elastic exporter must be defined in `service.pipelines.traces.exporters`.

NOTE: For more information about getting started with an OpenTelemetry Collector,
see the {ot-collector}[OpenTelemetry collector] docs.

[float]
[[open-telemetry-elastic-caveats]]
==== Caveats

If collecting metrics, please note that the https://www.javadoc.io/doc/io.opentelemetry/opentelemetry-api/latest/io/opentelemetry/api/metrics/DoubleValueRecorder.html[`DoubleValueRecorder`]
and https://www.javadoc.io/doc/io.opentelemetry/opentelemetry-api/latest/io/opentelemetry/api/metrics/LongValueObserver.html[`LongValueRecorder`] metrics are not yet supported.

[[open-telemetry-elastic-verify]]
==== Verify OpenTelemetry metrics data

> To validate that metrics are successfully being reported to {kib} is by using *Discover*.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use *Discover* to validate that metrics are successfully being reported to {kib}.
```

Author: Thanks.

. Launch {kib}:
+
--
include::../tab-widgets/open-kibana-widget.asciidoc[]
--

. In the side navigation, under *{kib}*, select *Discover*.
. Select `apm-*` as your index pattern.
. Filter the data to only show documents with metrics: `processor.name :"metric"`
. Narrow your search with a known OpenTelemetry field. For example, if you have an `order_value` field, add `order_value: *` to your search to return
only OpenTelemetry metrics documents.

[[open-telemetry-elastic-kibana]]
==== Visualize in {kib}

> TSVB within {kib} is the recommended visualization for OpenTelemtry metrics. TSVB is a time series data visualizer that allows you to use the full power of the

Author: Oops. Thanks!

> {ess} aggregation framework. With TSVB, you can combine an infinite number of aggregations to display complex data.

Reviewer 2: Is `{ess}` correct here?

Author: Ah! Should be {es} Thanks.

KPI metrics, along with performance-related metrics.

// TODO: add screenshot of dashboard

Let's have a look at how this dashboard was created, specifically the Sales USD and System load visualizations.

. In the side navigation, under *{kib}*, select *Dashboard*.
. Click *Dashboard* and select *Create dashboard*.
. Click *Save*, enter the name of your dashboard, and then click *Save* again.
. Let’s add a Sales USD visualization. Click *Edit*.
. Click *Create new* and then select *TSVB*.
. For the label name, enter Sales USD, and then select the following:
+
* Aggregation: `Positive Rate`.
* Field: `order_count`.
* Scale: `auto`.
* Group by: `Everything`
. Click *Save and return*.
. Now let's create a visualization of load averages on the system. Click *Create new*.
. Select *TSVB*.
. Enter the label name, System load, and then select the following:
+
* Aggregation: `Average`.
* Field: `system.cpu.load_average.1m`.
* Group by: `Terms`.
* By: `host.ip`.
* Top: `10`.
* Order by: `Doc Count (default)`.
* Direction: `Descending`.
. Click *Save and return*.
+
Both visualizations are now displayed on your custom dashboard.

> 

Reviewer 2: I'll be curious to see how difficult this is to maintain.
